FCFS Scheduling

First come first serve (FCFS) scheduling algorithm simply schedules the jobs according to their arrival time. 
The job which comes first in the ready queue will get the CPU first. The lesser the arrival time of the job, the sooner will the job get the CPU. 
FCFS scheduling may cause the problem of starvation if the burst time of the first process is the longest among all the jobs.

Advantages of FCFS
Simple
Easy
First come, First serv

Disadvantages of FCFS
The scheduling method is non preemptive, the process will run to the completion.
Due to the non-preemptive nature of the algorithm, the problem of starvation may occur.
Although it is easy to implement, but it is poor in performance since the average waiting time is higher as compare to other scheduling algorithms.


The Turnaround time and the waiting time are calculated by using the following formula.

Turn Around Time = Completion Time - Arrival Time   
Waiting Time = Turnaround time - Burst Time   
The average waiting Time is determined by summing the respective waiting time of all the processes and divided the sum by the total number of processes.

Convoy Effect in FCFS-

FCFS may suffer from the convoy effect if the burst time of the first job is the highest among all.
As in the real life, if a convoy is passing through the road then the other persons may get blocked until it passes completely. 
This can be simulated in the Operating System also.

If the CPU gets the processes of the higher burst time at the front end of the ready queue then the processes of lower burst 
time may get blocked which means they may never get the CPU if the job in the execution has a very high burst time. This is called convoy effect or starvation.


Shortest Job First (SJF) Scheduling
Till now, we were scheduling the processes according to their arrival time (in FCFS scheduling). However, SJF scheduling algorithm,
schedules the processes according to their burst time.

In SJF scheduling, the process with the lowest burst time, among the list of available processes in the ready queue, is going to be scheduled next.
However, it is very difficult to predict the burst time needed for a process hence this algorithm is very difficult to implement in the system.

Advantages of SJF
Maximum throughput
Minimum average waiting and turnaround time

Disadvantages of SJF
May suffer with the problem of starvation
It is not implementable because the exact Burst time for a process can't be known in advance.
